Hi everyone, today i am here to talk on the subject "FREE AND OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARES".
Being IT folks it would be better to have some knowledge about this.
Before going into what is Free software and Open source software let's have a look at the 
history of software from this perspective.

In the early days --  after 1950 -- all softwares
were free or perceived as free.  That is to say, programmers felt they
had the right to copy, study, modify, and redistribute it.  Indeed, in
the beginning, there were no copyright and no patents for computer programs.

In 1980's it became legal in USA to copyright computer programs and to patent algorithms.
Then software vendors stopped suppllying the code. `Non-Disclosure Agreements' prevented
programmers from helping each other.


These attacks on programmers' freedom inspired Richard Stallman, a
brilliant computer programmer, to talk about freedom and then to pull
together many people and start the GNU Project, to create and
distribute free softwares.

Coming back to free softwares, when a software is said to be free ?
in Stallman's words, if user controls the program, then its free software and
if program controls user its not a free software.
According definition of free software as provided in the official gnu website, a software is free
if the user have four basic freedom
1. to run the program for any use.
2. to study the working of the software, ie source code should be available.
3. to redistribute the software so as to help his neighbor.
4. to destribute the modified version of the software so as the whole community benifits.

For example, a software say MSWord is not free because it Microsoft doesn't give you these freedom.
On the other hand Liberoffice is free because all these rights are given to users.

There is a myth that free sotfware is alwalys free of cost. free software it a matter of freedom 
and  not price even though most of the free softwares are free of cost also.

Now what is an open source software ?. It is more or less similar to free software.
But there is one difference between them. Free software is a philosophy that the use of 
computers should not lead to people being prevented from cooperating with each other.
For that user should have all the freedom on the software and software shouldn't have an owner.
This is because ownership of software is far different from the ownership of material products.
There is no copying machine for material products whereas you can make thousands of copies of software 
in no time.

Open source is a development methodology. It doesn't focus on the benefits of community or freedom
but on the quality of software only. The source code is shared so that people can debug and suggest 
modifications. 
For example java is an open source software as the sorce code is available.
But its not free as the modification is restricted.

Why free softwares
There are three reasons to favor freedom softwares: safety, quality, and opportunity.
Safety is prime requirement today and is achived through encription. 
Earlier developers thought that if they had kept their algorithm secrete it would be difficult to crack it.
But now its proven that open standards are secure than proprietory standards.
For example firefox is more secure than internet explorer even if the source is not available.

Free softwares provide high quality softwares. International space station is a good example. 
United Space Alliance which manages the computer systems has migrated their os from windows to 
debian/linux.
